page 17
German is a so-called infl ectional language. Inflections are grammatical
endings. The plural endings of nouns (books, children, oxen) and the
endings of the various persons of the verb (I go, he goes) are examples
of inflectional endings that both English and German share. Case is
another form of inflection. At its simplest level case is the distinction
between the subject (the nominative case), the direct object (the
accusative case) and the indirect object (the dative case, i.e. ‘to’) in a
sentence, e.g.

    Der Vater hat seiner Tochter eine Email geschickt.
    The father (nom.) sent an email (acc.) to his daughter (dat.).

This sentence shows case being applied to nouns, der, seiner and eine being
the indicators not only of the gender of their respective nouns, but also of
their case, something which English can only indicate with word order. But
look at this variant:

    Seiner Tochter hat der Vater eine Email geschickt.
    
    This sentence means the same as the former although the connotation
is different, i.e. it was his daughter he sent an email to and not anyone
else. The forms seiner and der clearly indicate who is doing the sending
(the subject or nominative) and who the email is being sent to (the
indirect object or dative). One advantage of case, as this simple example
illustrates, is that it can give the speaker a greater choice of word
order.

English has only preserved separate case forms in its pronouns, i.e. ‘I/me’,
‘he/him’, ‘she/her’, ‘we/us’, ‘they/them’; only in the second person, i.e. ‘you/
you’, is no distinction made any more, although previously it was ‘thou/
thee’ and ‘ye/you’. English uses ‘me’, ‘him’, ‘her’ etc. in both the accusative
and the dative, e.g.

    Ich habe ihn zu Hause besucht und ihm einen Scheck für €55 gegeben.
    I visited him (acc.) at home and gave him (dat.) a cheque (acc.) for 55 euros.

The difference between ‘who’ and ‘whom’, which is now waning in English,
is also an example of case, i.e. nominative versus accusative/dative, e.g.
    
    Who lives here?
    Wer wohnt hier?

    Who(m) did you visit in Berlin?
    Wen hast du in Berlin besucht?

    Who did you give the cheque to?/To whom did you give the cheque?
    Wem hast du den Scheck gegeben?

The fact that ‘whom’ is fast dying out in English provides a living (just)
example of the fate of case distinctions in English. But the point is that these
distinctions are still very much alive and kicking in German and contribute
to what English speakers fi nd diffi cult about learning German. But once
you have got your mind around the concept of case, it is extremely logical
and getting it right is one of the great satisfactions of learning German.
In German, case endings don’t just apply in the above instances. Adjectives
take case endings, and verbs and prepositions can require that the pronouns
and nouns that follow them take either the accusative, dative or genitive
case, e.g.

    Unser alter (nom. m.) Nachbar hat einen sehr netten (acc. m.) Sohn.
    Our elderly neighbour has a very nice son.

    Er hat mir geholfen. (The verb helfen takes a dative object.)
    He helped me.

    Meine Frau ist böse auf mich. (böse auf ? acc. ? angry with)
    My wife is angry with me.


//// 4.1

In a few specifi c cases the nouns themselves take case endings, not just the
determiners (i.e. indefi nite and defi nite articles, possessives etc.) standing in
front of them as illustrated above. These few cases need to be noted.

All masculine and neuter nouns take an -(e)s ending in the genitive case in
the singular; monosyllabic nouns may take -es rather than simply -s in more
formal sounding language, but you will never be wrong if you simply add
-s, except if the noun itself ends in s, ß or z, when -es must be used, e.g.

    der Name seines Sohn(e)s
    his son’s name

    der Anfang des Gebets
    the beginning of the prayer

    die Größe des Kreuzes
    the size of the cross

In very formal written style and in older texts monosyllabic masculine and
neuter nouns in the dative singular optionally take an -e ending, e.g.

    hinter dem Baume
    behind the tree

    auf dem Meeresgrunde
    at the bottom of the sea

    Dem Deutschen Volke
    To the German people (written on the façade of the Reichstag)

Generally speaking, these days this ending is limited to standard expres-
sions, e.g.

    zu Hause
    at home
    
    im Grunde genommen
    basically

    im Laufe der Zeit
    in the course of time

Nouns of all three genders must add an n in the dative plural if the plural
form does not already end in -n, e.g.
    in den Zimmern (? pl. Zimmer)
    in the rooms

    unter den Bäumen (? pl. Bäume)
    under the trees

    von den Mädchen (? pl. Mädchen, i.e. plural already ends in n)
    from the girls

//// 4.2